README.md, before:

# scQuint (single-cell quantification of introns)

## Installation
```
pip install git+https://github.com/songlab-cal/scquint.git
```
If you need the VAE, do a full installation (with more complex dependencies):
```
pip install "scquint[vae] @ git+https://github.com/songlab-cal/scquint.git"
```
Read mapping and intron quantification also require STAR, samtools and bedtools. An easy way to install is via conda:

```conda install -c bioconda star samtools bedtools```

## Read mapping
Our read mapping workflow, using [STAR](https://github.com/alexdobin/STAR), is designed for reliable detection of novel junctions. However, it is very computationally demanding. Users should consider going directly to intron quantification step if they already have produced bam alignment files. 

`python -m scquint.quantification.run read_mapping/Snakefile <snakemake_options> --config min_cells_per_intron=<min_cells_per_intron> fastq_paths=<fastq_paths> fasta_path=<fasta_path> gtf_path=<gtf_path> sjdb_overhang=<sjdb_overhang>`

`<snakemake_options>`: any options to pass to snakemake, e.g. `--cores 32 --directory output/mapping/`

`<sjdb_overhang>`: should be read_length-1. See STAR manual for details.

## Intron quantification
`python -m scquint.quantification.run introns/Snakefile <snakemake_options> --config min_cells_per_intron=<min_cells_per_intron> bam_paths=<bam_paths> chromosomes_path=<chromosomes_path> fasta_path=<fasta_path> gtf_path=<gtf_path> chrom_sizes_path=<chrom_sizes_path> sjdb_path=<sjdb_path>`

`sjdb_path`: annotated junctions in the format of `STAR_index/sjdbList.out.tab`.

Precomputed AnnData objects are available at https://github.com/songlab-cal/scquint-analysis.

## Differential splicing
See `differential_splicing_example.ipynb` <a target="_blank" href="https://colab.research.google.com/github/songlab-cal/scquint/blob/main/differential_splicing_example.ipynb">
  <img src="https://colab.research.google.com/assets/colab-badge.svg" alt="Open In Colab"/>
</a>

## Citation
Benegas, G., Fischer, J., Song., Y.S. Robust and annotation-free analysis of alternative splicing across diverse cell types in mice. eLife 2022;11:e73520  
DOI: [10.7554/eLife.73520](https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.73520)

Commit message:

Add quantification starting from STARsolo

README.md, after:

# scQuint (single-cell quantification of introns)

## Installation
```
pip install git+https://github.com/songlab-cal/scquint.git
```
If you need the VAE, do a full installation (with more complex dependencies):
```
pip install "scquint[vae] @ git+https://github.com/songlab-cal/scquint.git"
```

## Intron quantification
We recommend starting from the intron/junction count matrix obtained by running [STARsolo](https://github.com/alexdobin/STAR/blob/master/docs/STARsolo.md) with options `--soloFeatures Gene SJ`.

[How to run on Smart-seq data](https://github.com/alexdobin/STAR/blob/master/docs/STARsolo.md#plate-based-smart-seq-scrna-seq) 

[How to run on 10X Chromium data](https://github.com/alexdobin/STAR/blob/master/docs/STARsolo.md#running-starsolo-for-10x-chromium-scrna-seq-data) (We note that only a small proportion of alternative splicing events, those close to the 3' end of the gene, can be reliably detected in 10X data.)

Starting from the splice junction output directory of STARsolo, scQuint can prepare the data with a few steps:
```python
from scquint.data import load_adata_from_starsolo, add_gene_annotation, group_introns

adata = load_adata_from_starsolo("path/to/SJ_solo_outs")
adata = add_gene_annotation(adata, "path/to/gtf.gz")
adata = group_introns(adata, by="three_prime")
adata.write_h5ad("adata_spl.h5ad")
```

Precomputed AnnData objects are available at https://github.com/songlab-cal/scquint-analysis.

## Differential splicing
The basic commands would be:
```python
from scquint.differential_splicing import run_differential_splicing

diff_spl_intron_groups, diff_spl_introns = run_differential_splicing(adata, cell_idx_a, cell_idx_b)
```
See `differential_splicing_example.ipynb` for more details. <a target="_blank" href="https://colab.research.google.com/github/songlab-cal/scquint/blob/main/differential_splicing_example.ipynb">
  <img src="https://colab.research.google.com/assets/colab-badge.svg" alt="Open In Colab"/>
</a>

## Citation
Benegas, G., Fischer, J., Song., Y.S. Robust and annotation-free analysis of alternative splicing across diverse cell types in mice. eLife 2022;11:e73520  
DOI: [10.7554/eLife.73520](https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.73520)
